Add documentation for online IDEs (#2370)
scalameta/metals: docs/editors/online-ides.md

---
id: online-ides
title: Online IDEs
---

# Gitpod
Besides common editors, Metals can be used in the online development environments. One of them is Gitpod, 
in which you can create the code editor setup that can be used directly in your browser 
as well as shared with others without a need to explicitly set up the tools and settings required
to run Scala project with Metals. We are going to provide the example setup for Metals with such environment 

> based on Gitpod platform. You can read more about Gitpod [here](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
based on the Gitpod platform. You can read more about Gitpod [here](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/).
```

## Example Gitpod repository for Metals
The repository which is already set up and integrated with Gitpod can be found 

> [here](https://github.com/scalameta/metals-gitpod-sample). The project contains out of the box 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[here](https://github.com/scalameta/metals-gitpod-sample). The project contains, out of the box, 
```

> everything that you need to start experimenting with Metals in the online VSCode-like environment. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
everything that you need to start experimenting with Metals in an online environment similar to Visual Studio Code. 
```

---
id: online-ides
title: Online IDEs
---

Metals can also be installed in some online environments, which enable users to

> work on their code inside of a browser. This can be good option when users need

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
work on their code inside of a browser. This can be a good option when users need
```

Reviewer: Fixed!

> to setup their workspace quickly or are lacking appropriate resources on their

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
to set up their workspace quickly or are lacking appropriate resources on their
```

Reviewer: Done

local machine.

# Gitpod

One of such online environments is Gitpod, which can be used directly in your

> browser as well as shared with others without a need to explicitly set up the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
browser as well as shared with others without the need to explicitly set up the
```

Reviewer: Done

tools and settings needed to run Scala project with Metals. You can read more
about Gitpod [here](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/).

## Example Gitpod repository for Metals

> An example repository, which is already set up and integrated with Gitpod can be

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An example repository, which is already set up and integrated with Gitpod, can be
```

Reviewer: Done

found [here](https://github.com/scalameta/metals-gitpod-sample). The project
contains, out of the box, everything that you need to start experimenting with
Metals in an online environment similar to Visual Studio Code. The only thing
that you need to do to set up the environment by yourself is to open the
[link](https://gitpod.io/#https://github.com/scalameta/gitpod-sample) provided
in the README of the project. The import prompt for Metals will show up

> (however, in general, it wouldn't be needed if the _.bloop_ files exist).

Reviewer 3: I think we should maybe clarify what we mean here a bit. Since this isn't always fully true, and readers may interpret this as any time there is `.bloop` files, then we are good. However, there may be cases where you still need an import with existing `.bloop` files.

Reviewer: Reworded this a bit to mention that it's only the case in this setup

necessary tools to run the Scala project with Metals, you can fork and customize
this repository.

Gitpod environment can be set up from scratch with the
[setup assistant](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/configuration/). It helps you to
create scripts that are then used by Gitpod to make fresh instances of the
environment. These scripts are for example:

- **prebuild** that can be used to set up the environment on commit push even
  before opening it
- **init** invoked when the workspace is opened for the first time
- **command** run every time when the workspace is run again after being stopped

The Gitpod configuration is located under _.gitpod.yml_. The minimal Gitpod
setup requires in our case Scala and Metals extensions to be provided which is
already done in the example project.

Gitpod itself is based on the [Eclipse Theia project](https://theia-ide.org/),
an editor which can be easily customized according to your needs and is backed
by the [Eclipse Foundation](https://www.eclipse.org/org/foundation/). The Metals
plugin will also work in an environment created within
[Eclipse Che](https://www.eclipse.org/che/), which is a complementary project to

> Theia that helps companies and users create their own online workspaces

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Theia that helps companies and users create their own online workspace
```

Reviewer: Done

infrastructure. These topics might especially be interesting for larger

> companies that might want to increase their productivity by improving their

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
companies that want to increase their productivity by improving their
```

You already used might in this sentence earlier, so I'd avoid using it twice.

Reviewer: Changed the previous to `should`

---
id: online-ides
title: Online IDEs
---

Metals can also be installed in some online environments, which enable users to
work on their code inside of a browser. This can be a good option when users need
to set up their workspace quickly or are lacking appropriate resources on their
local machine.

# Gitpod

One of such online environments is Gitpod, which can be used directly in your
browser as well as shared with others without the need to explicitly set up the
tools and settings needed to run Scala project with Metals. You can read more
about Gitpod [here](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/).

> ![example](https://imgur.com/2AiIN43.gif)

Reviewer: I also added the example gif from the front page.
